So let's rename this
file now to local storage so that we still have it for reference but we can create a new app.js
file because now we'll dive in to cookies.
Now cookies are these special storage in a sense because they are attached to outgoing HttpRequests and
that can be helpful depending on which kind of application you're building, of course your server needs
to be prepared to do something with your cookies, otherwise them being added to outgoing requests adds
no extra value,
it won't be a problem but it also won't give you any special benefits,
you need some server side code which also reads the cookies so that this actually is an advantage and
that of course in turn depends on which use case you're handling, which application you are building.
Nonetheless, here I want to focus on how we work with cookies from the client side.
If you want to learn all about server side by the way, my Node.js course is a great next step, just
to throw that in right here
but let's have a look at what we can do with cookies here in the browser. We access the cookies with
documents.cookie,
this sounds like we access a single cookie but actually it gives us access to all cookie data stored.
To start simple, let's simply console log document.cookie and see what we got in there.
If I run this, if I now reload here, you see I get nothing,
we got nothing stored here on this page which makes sense because which kind of cookies should be
stored for this page, it's brand new, it's not connected to a server even so there can't be any cookies
which the servers set because servers can set cookies with headers on their responses, so it makes
sense that we have no data on our cookie here.
We can change this though
and for that let me grab this code from local storage where we get our two buttons and replace
all the code with that and then also make sure to add these listeners here, all the listener code,
copy that over into app.js but of course clear what we have in these listeners
so that we start from scratch again and
now let's start with the store button.
We can access document.cookie and what you can do here and that might sound really strange but you can
set it equal to a string and this will add a new entry to the cookie, so it will not override or clear
the existing cookie data,
it will add something to it. Now that can be strange because it looks like you're assigning a new value but
no indeed it will add something not replace, it will only replace a cookie that already has the same key
you're about to add but step-by-step. Under the hood,
this simply uses a setter function which triggers when you assign a new value and that setter function
will then add this as a new key-value pair to the existing pairs instead of replace the existing ones.
So how do we add an entry here now?
Let's say we again want to store some userId which we got, u123,
well then we can add this here by picking a key, userId or uid, then an equals sign without any
whitespace just like this
and then your value.
Now here, I'll use a template literal so that I can simply inject this,
of course you could also just concatenate this to a string. So here I'll inject userId as a value
for this cookie ID or this cookie key here.
So if you save this and you go back and click on store, let's check out the application tab and what
you'll notice there under cookies is that you don't see anything there,
now let me press store again multiple times, nothing shows up there. Now reason for that is unlike local
and session storage, cookies really only are available
if your web page is getting served with a real server.
Now I covered this in the modules section and in the tooling section, so you probably are aware of why
we need such a server, the file protocol simply just doesn't simulate real circumstances under which
our page would be served.
Now we did already install a server in these modules and that was the serve package which you can find
by googling for serve.js. You install it with npm which also is a tool you get by installing Node.js
which you also need for this server to work, so you need to visit nodejs.org, download node, walk
through that installer, thereafter install serve with npm install -g serve and once you did all
that in your project with the terminal built into the IDE here to automatically have a terminal or
a command prompt which is navigated into your project folder automatically, you can just run serve in
there and what this will do is it will serve the index.html file in that folder automatically
when you visit the address that it's being shown here, localhost:5000
in my case here.
So now if we load localhost:5000 instead of the page through the file protocol, if we revisit
the cookies here, I see one dummy cookie which is probably set by some other tool, some extension
but if I now click store here and I reload,
you see the userId show up there.
So now we also can access cookies through Javascript and to read the value,
we now just have to go to our retrieve click listener and we can console log document.cookie and
it will output what's inside of our cookies.
So if we do that, save that, reload and go to the console in the dev tools,
now you see the cookie I set here.
Now what about the other cookie which was set there if we go back to application? This cookie has
a special flag,
this flag here, the HTTP only flag and that means this cookie is only accessible by the server, not accessible
from browser side Javascript, an extra security mechanism.
This is why with browser side Javascript when we print all cookies, we only see this key-value pair.